Bloomberg Audio Studios. Podcasts,
radio, news.
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> Joe, it is currently April 10th.
>> That's right.
>> It's a Friday. It's a beautiful Friday
outside.
We always say when we're recording
things nowadays because we never know
what's going to change in the next hour
or day or week, but at the moment there
is some sort of ceasefire
>> Yes.
>> between the US and Iran. Israel is
rather more uncertain at the moment, but
it seems that whatever happens in the
short term with this particular conflict
that the region, the Gulf region and the
Middle East has already been vastly
vastly changed.
>> Yeah, it seems almost certain of that in
many different dimensions. I mean, look,
you know, first of all there's just been
the literal physical damage. You can
have a ceasefire, but there's going to
be energy and time to get expended etc.
Then of course, and we already have done
an episode for example about Dubai real
estate in particular or Dubai in
particular and the question of like here
is this country that was perceived
really by people around the world as
maybe one of the most stable places that
you could live and obviously some of
that has been called into question. But
then like you know, here is just a it's
just a gigantic war and wars even short
ones potentially have all kinds of
ripple effects and scars and so forth
and it'll change obviously the course of
the region.
>> Yeah, the way I think about it is the
Gulf region was sort of a center of
let's say three things. So energy
>> Mhm.
>> oil and resulting petrochemicals which
we've talked a lot about, capital
there's a lot
>> of money emanating from the region
because of its oil wealth, and that
flows into all sorts of things from, you
know, US tech stocks to infrastructure
investments and all of that.
>> And then thirdly, it's Well, I guess I
could add trade. It's a purveyor of
trade routes, for sure, but setting that
aside, thirdly, it's also a capital of
living standards and this idea of we're
going to build a diversified Gulf
city-state where people can come and
live.
>> And we sort of talked about on the Dubai
episode. But today we're going to be
talking about maybe all three or four of
those things and what this particular
conflict actually means for them. For a
region that has really built itself
around this idea of energy, capital,
living standards, and trade.
>> And then the one thing I would just
point out is that, obviously, the region
has almost a reputation for being in
some version of constant war, or there's
constant tension, etc., right? So at
various time Do you disagree?
>> I mean, the Iran threat has always been
there, but one of the key themes of the
UAE, for instance, becoming this haven
of stability, was that it wasn't
expected to erupt in this way.
>> That is indisputable, and that is part
of why it's so shocking. But, you know,
tensions in the Middle East, on some
level, is almost like a cliché in the
news, etc. And so the you know, over
years we've had multiple Gulf wars,
etc., the war in Gaza that's been taking
place over the last multiple years. I
mean, there's just an extraordinary
there's just a long history of a
conflict.
>> Yes, so we are going to be talking about
how the latest conflict is going to
impact the region potentially forever.
So we have the perfect guest, I'm very
happy to say. Uh we're going to be
speaking with the chief emerging markets
economist over at Bloomberg Economics,
Ziad Daoud, someone we've spoken to
before. Uh I think our last episode with
with him was about Egypt, but someone I
used to speak to a lot more when I was
actually based in Abu Dhabi and he was
based in Dubai. He's about to go back to
Dubai after being in London for the past
few weeks. So, Ziad, thank you so much
for coming back on Odd Lots.
>> Thank you for having me, Joe and Tracy.
>> So, out of curiosity, what have the past
few weeks been like for you as someone
who is not, you know, not just living
and breathing Gulf economics, but also
physically living in the region for the
past few years?
>> It's been intense because although we've
been expecting the war to take place,
the intensity of it, the reaction,
and feeling it rather than expecting it
and living through it rather than
expecting it has been, yeah,
unprecedented, I think, for the region.
But, yeah, it was expected, but it was
still different when you feel it than
when when we when you just anticipate
it.
>> When you say it was expected,
do you mean it was expected in the sense
that by early February
that, okay, you know, clearly the
rhetoric and the actions and ship
movements, etc., pointing to possible
war, or was it something deeper,
long-standing where there was this
tension that was eventually perhaps
going to come to a boil or come to a
head in some manner or another?
>> I think for us, and we've done this in
writing and I've done that mostly with
my colleague Dina Esfandiary,
is that since the last four in June, the
12-day war,
>> Yeah.
>> it's felt like there was unfinished
business and there'll be a second round
of this war. So, we've written multiple
pieces saying this is not over, there'll
be another round of escalation.
And towards the beginning of the year,
as you had more US mobilization, as you
had more threats from President Trump,
it became increasingly likely that a war
was going to take place. I personally
canceled some trips because I was I
thought the war would erupt while I'm
abroad and I didn't want to be stuck
abroad.
And we also thought it was it was going
to start on a weekend, actually. We
thought it was going to start either on
a Friday or a Saturday. So, I think from
January onwards, every Friday at the
office, we would ask for expectations,
who thinks that there will be a a war
this coming weekend. And sure enough, it
did erupt on February 28th. So, yeah,
and in some sense, it was expected. I
was on alert every weekend waiting for
something to happen.
>> One thing that I think was more
unexpected was the retaliation by Iran
on places like the UAE. And
I think it's probably fair to say that
if if you were a leader in the UAE or
Saudi Arabia, for that matter, who had
invested heavily in Trump in various
ways politically,
this was maybe not what you were
expecting to be dragged into this
particular conflict and see some of your
infrastructure directly hit. What's the
mood like for UAE and Saudi leaders at
the moment?
>> For them, I think it's probably their
worst nightmare. In some sense, it's
it's an outcome they had tried and
lobbied to avoid for a long time.
Let's remember that just during this
Trump's term of presidency, which
started in January 2025,
the Gulf leaders hosted Trump on his
first planned foreign trip, if you
exclude the trip to the Vatican when the
Pope died. OPEC plus, which is led by
Saudi Arabia, and it has number of Gulf
countries as important producers,
started raising oil output in April,
shortly after Trump's inauguration, by
amounts that are far bigger than markets
were expecting. And now, that's that
came after months of delay. And we were,
among other people, were asking why why
did they do this against probably their
economic interests? And one potential
hypothesis is that they were trying to
please Trump because he liked lower oil
prices. So, they hosted him on his first
trip. They gave him the you know, they
injected a lot more barrels of oil into
the market to lower oil prices, but
potentially against some of their
economic interest. They pledged
trillions and trillions of dollars of
investments and deals in the US.
So, they gave all of this and I think
they wanted one thing, which is
basically no regional war because they
thought they'd be caught in the
crossfire.
And what did they get? Trump visited the
Gulf three Gulf states in May 2025. He
visited the UAE, he visited Saudi Arabia
and he visited Qatar.
A month later, a war erupted between
Israel and Iran, which the US intervened
in.
Four months later, Israel bombed Doha in
Qatar where Trump was in May.
And about a year less than a year later,
in fact, we have a regional war in this
country in which these countries are in
the crossfires. So, I think it's an
outcome that they tried hard to avoid.
But for Trump, when it became a choice
between what the Gulf wanted and what
Israel wanted, Trump had the clear
basically choice, which he chose Israel
over the Gulf.
>> One of the things you hear about or
people talk about is, okay, the US is an
important security partner for the
region. It provides a quote security
umbrella, etc.
What does it mean to be an important
security partner if infrastructure was
in fact hit? Not all of it was able to
stop. The US was not able or has not
been able to open the Strait of Hormuz
unilaterally. And actually, at the
moment, Iran clearly controls it. Does
this fundamental premise, like setting
aside how people feel, if the US does
not have the capability,
the missiles, the missile defense, etc.,
to actually keep secure the
infrastructure, to keep the Strait of
Hormuz open, does it change the
discussion or the thinking of what a
security relationship even means?
>> I think it does, but there are two
dimensions to this. There is a dimension
where you have the military equipment
and there's a dimension where you have
sort of the political will and the
strategic side of it. In terms of
military equipment, I think US military
equipment might have proven their worth.
>> Okay.
>> A lot of drones, a lot of missiles were
thrown at the Gulf.
And very few percentage of this has
filtered through.
>> Okay.
>> Yes, some have, but it could have been a
lot worse. And the reason why it wasn't
a lot worse is because they were using
state-of-the-art US military equipment,
which has proven their worth. So, I
don't think that will stop.
Actually, interestingly, if you look at
the Gulf trade relationship, there was a
big change. So, the US used to be an
important trade partner, then China took
over around 2010, and now trade with
China is at least three times as big as
trade with the US.
Except in one area, where defense, the
US completely dominates.
>> Right.
>> So, that's that side, and I don't think
that will change. And then there is the
political and sort of the strategic
side. This is not the first time that
the US security umbrella disappoints the
Gulf. This is one episode out of
several. There's this current one, which
is probably the biggest. There was an
episode in 2017 when Qatar faced a
blockade from its neighbors and didn't
get the US protection that it wanted.
You know, in 2018 and 19, there were
attacks on energy facilities in the
Gulf, both in the Persian Gulf, but as
well as the attack on Aramco in 2019,
and the US was nowhere to be seen.
So, I think the security umbrella, the
political umbrella for the US security,
is definitely there is a challenge
there, and it hasn't delivered on
certain important points of time. But
when it comes to the military equipment,
I think that that has proven its worth.
>> Can we talk about intra-gulf
relationships for a second because it's
it's hard to keep up. From what I
remember, the blockade of Qatar was the
big story when I was in the region in
like 2017. And since then, it seems like
Qatar kind of made up with Saudi and the
UAE, but there are still some tensions.
Meanwhile, Saudi Arabia and the UAE are
still maybe
best described as frenemies at this
point. I don't know. What's the current
status of those relationships? And does
the conflict in Iran maybe start to
bring some of those regional superpowers
closer together?
>> Right. So, the big story in the Gulf in
terms of intra-gulf relations before
February 28th was there was a big Saudi
and the and UAE rift. It was visible. It
was out in the open. And it reminded a
lot of people of the rift with Qatar in
2017. Although, I didn't think it would
escalate to that level.
And the points of disagreement were
basically the two policies two
contradictory policies on Yemen, on
Libya, and on Sudan.
I think if you think about the Gulf,
there are so many common things in the
Gulf. You know, they share they're
almost the same ethnicity, same
language, same religion, same coastline,
same geography. Even at times same same
external threats.
But, there are also points of
disagreement. I think if you think about
the economics, all of these countries
are trying to diversify away from oil.
And they're sort of sometimes they
overlap on the same sectors.
Sometimes they have different visions
for how to manage the oil wealth, which
is important. And that sometimes shows
up in OPEC plus meetings.
And on the security and national
security and geopolitics,
there is disagreement about the role of
political Islam in the region. There are
disagreements on how to deal with the
other regional powers, Turkey, Iran, and
Israel. And there are different visions
for what to do with the wider region,
with Yemen, with Sudan, with Libya, and
even Egypt and the Horn of Africa.
So, the current state is is basically
these countries have different visions
and different paths. And I think even
after this conflict, there'll be
different visions on how to deal with
the US. The question that Joe asked, you
know, there is a disappointment in the
US, what do we do? I think some
countries like the UAE would double down
on its relationship with the US and
possibly Israel.
I think a country like Qatar will stick
to the US, but tries to create a rift
between the US and Israel while it has
an alliance with Turkey.
I think if you're Saudi Arabia, what the
US wanted from you is money, is deals,
but also a normalization with Israel
because every US president thinks that
they can get the Nobel Peace Prize if
they deliver that. That looks distant
now in the context of the current war.
And Saudi has to choose where it aligns
itself relative to the others.
Oman is a completely neutral country
that is talking to everyone and quietly
doing things its own way.
And Bahrain is again somewhere in
between. So, I think we used to think
about the Gulf as one entity. This These
six countries are all monarchies,
they're all oil and gas producers um
that have the same foreign relations or
sort of foreign foreign um
relations strategy.
And it's it's it's actually very
different now. There are at least three
or four sides to it.
>> The other point of contention that I
think was sort of like coming to the
fore, although it was never as explicit
as some of the foreign policy stuff, was
it felt like everyone was trying to do
the same thing economically at the same
time, which was diversify the economy.
So, not just have oil, but also build up
petrochemicals, build up tourism, build
up the technology centers. Everyone's
going to be, you know, like a big data
center play. And the The in my mind was
always like, well, can everyone be doing
this at exactly the same time?
>> That's That's a great question, Tracy,
and and possibly the likely answer is
no. And you're right. So, they face the
common question, which is basically
their economies are extremely dependent
on oil and gas. If you look at the
exports, if you look at government
revenues, they're dominated by oil and
gas.
They knew they need to diversify away
from this. They need to diversify away
from this because oil prices were
volatile, because if oil prices drop by
50%, you can't have your income drop by
50% without adjusting your spending,
which is usually painful.
So, it's good to diversify. So, what
they did is they went to consultants and
asked them, you know, what sectors
should we target? And they got the same
answer. You should move to
petrochemicals, you can move up the
hydrocarbon value chain.
You should be a financial center, a
tourism hub, a logistical hub. And now
it's called AI, it used to be called
knowledge-based economy and big data at
some point.
>> for a while, too.
>> The problem with this is you're talking
about small geography and the same time
zone almost. So, do you really need
multiple mega airports with multiple
>> Yeah.
>> global airlines? Probably not. Do you
need multiple mega ports? Probably not.
You probably need one or two. Do you
need multiple financial centers? There's
a financial center in Dubai, another one
in Abu Dhabi, an old one in Manama in
Bahrain. Qatar has one, Saudi has one.
Probably not. You probably just need
one.
So, you have this sort of crowding out.
Again, tourism. Yes, like in January and
December is beautiful over there. The
weather is great when the rest of the
world is dark, cold, and rainy. But
probably people are not going to come
and spend, you know, 6 weeks instead of
10 days there. They're going to split
that 10 days between different
countries. So, that creates a form of
cannibalization and competition. And
that adds to basically the intra sort of
GCC competition, which comes to the
surface at times.
>> Tracy, do you know the name of a Qatar's
first LNG carrier?
>> I have no idea. What is it?
>> a very random trivia question I came
across the other day. Do you know?
>> No, I don't, Joe.
>> Their first LNG carrier is the ship the
Rex Tillerson because he got involved to
end that blockade you talked about, the
2017 one. So, he was the one that sort
of crafted the diplomatic solution. So,
it's an honor to him, their first LNG
carrier that
>> That's amazing.
>> Yeah, it's a it's right now
>> case that Rex Tillerson used to be the
CEO of Exxon Mobil. Exxon Mobil was one
of the one of the early companies that
went into the Qatar LNG industry.
>> There you go. So, they'll call That's
right. So, like he, you know, he's like
a patron saint of the country,
basically. And so, he got they named the
ship after him. Something I'm curious
about is, you know, you mentioned in
your first answer this disappointment
nightmare scenario because ultimately,
Trump, despite the visits and all the
stuff, like
went to war with Iran, at least it chose
the security preferences of Israel as
maybe perhaps a neutral way to put it or
something like that. That he prioritized
Israel's security interests over the
rest of the region. What I'm curious
about is like, okay, so the regional
players are very disappointed with that,
but they're probably going to grit their
teeth, etc. And they'll continue to, you
know, you mentioned UAE may double down
on its US relationship, grit their
teeth, continue. Does that create
problems though domestically? Now, it
even beyond just this war, obviously,
the war in Gaza, etc. Does that create
domestic stability problems for these
countries just in terms of like, why
aren't our governments taking a more
confrontational stance on this entire
issue?
>> I think there's few things here. I think
the first thing is is you're right to
point that. the flare up in the Middle
East did not start on February 28th,
2026. The Middle East has been an almost
constant state of war at least since
October 2023. It's just we're feeling it
more in the global economy because you
have the closure of the Strait of Hormuz
and because energy facilities in the
Gulf are being hit. Energy has been
weaponized now unlike the what was
happening before February 28th.
I think you're also right that what
happened in Gaza
has definitely led to a level of anger
and fury in the Arab world. That's
probably unprecedented and we've
reported on this. My colleagues, Sam
Dagher and others have written about
this for Bloomberg.
I think the Gulf though is sort of
different to other states and the unique
thing about the Gulf from the rest of
the Middle East, which is why they were
insulated from the volatility in the
region,
is that for the most part, maybe with
the exception of Saudi Arabia,
these are small countries with small
populations.
And at least three of them, Kuwait, the
UAE and Qatar have enormous hydrocarbon
wealth relative to the size of the
population.
>> Yeah.
>> And if you have that,
then that can lubricate a lot of things
and that can calm a lot of things down.
>> That's a very different condition than
say Jordan, right? Which is sort of
>> or or other places. Yes. That that's
exactly right. That's the unique thing
about about the Gulf is the level of
wealth and I think that's another
motivation for why they want to
diversify away from oil.
If in the future, because oil again has
not just created an economy
and petrodollars and sovereign wealth
funds and reinvestments into the global
economy, it has created a political
economy, a social contract and a
political system.
And a political system that remains calm
and stable in the face of a volatile
region.
And what you want to do is to make sure
that you maintain that calm, you have a
source of income that maintains that
calm and that cohesiveness when oil
becomes worthless in the future versus
now. And this is why you have this big
push towards diversification. But I
think the fact here, the level of wealth
versus the size of the population
creates different dynamics and
trade-offs versus other bigger countries
in the region.
>> Wait, can we go back to the Rex
Tillerson ship for a second? Because
this is actually a serious question, but
Qatar famously doesn't actually pipe
anything through the ground. It sends
all of its gas out on ships because it
distrusts its only land border, which is
with Saudi Arabia.
When we're talking about physical
changes to the Middle East and maybe
physical changes in the way that oil
actually flows out of the region, could
we see a situation where Qatar starts to
actually pipe stuff through the ground
instead of just ship it out?
>> I mean, this war has exposed something
uh a couple of things that are very
important. First, that the Middle East,
despite the rise of renewables, despite
the rise of shale oil in the US, despite
the rise of alternative sources of
energy, the Middle East is still super
important for global energy supplies.
And the second thing, most of the energy
that comes from Middle East goes through
this small choke point that's called the
Strait of Hormuz, which exposes the
world because it can cut supply, but it
also it's important for these countries
to get their their oil out and get and
and gas out and get their their money in
so they can, you know, sustain their
economies and investments and so on.
Now, I think this war has taught it us
taught us a third thing. If you have a
route out of the Strait of Hormuz,
you're probably insulated and you are in
a better position than otherwise.
>> A route besides the Strait of Hormuz,
right? Not
>> Or an alternative.
>> Yeah, okay.
>> Yeah. So, I think for example, I think
now Saudi Arabia's probably making more
money out of all exports
>> Mhm. compared to the pre-war period
simply because they have that pipeline
that goes from the east of the country
to the Red Sea. If you think about it,
just just simple maths, you know, Saudi
Arabia exports 30% less now, but oil
prices are up by a lot more.
So, if you take sort of that back of the
envelope calculation, that tells you
Saudi's probably making more income out
of its oil exports despite what is going
on in the region. Obviously, like the
threat of these these these this
pipeline could be attacked and the port
in the Red Sea could be attacked, but as
things stand, it's probably making more
money now than it did before the war.
So,
if you're Saudi, if you're the UAE, and
you have these alternative routes to
Hormuz, that's probably one of the
better investments that you've made over
the past few decades, and it's paying
off now.
You know, geography is kind to you
because you could do this unilaterally.
You can just have a pipeline from Abu
Dhabi to Fujairah. You don't need to go
through other countries. You can have a
pipeline from the east of Saudi Arabia
to the west of Saudi Arabia. It doesn't
have to go through other countries.
Other nations don't have that sort of
geographical dividend. If you're Kuwait,
if you're Bahrain, if you're Qatar,
you have to do it through other
countries.
Qatar has only one land border, which is
Saudi Arabia. So, if they want to have
an alternative to having Rex Tillerson
LNG tanker or other tankers, they then
have to do a pipeline, and the pipeline
will probably go through Saudi Arabia.
I'm not an expert enough. I don't think
it could go an underground pipeline to
Iran or all the way, I don't know, to
Kuwait via Iran, but I think the most
feasible thing is via Saudi Arabia.
Is that going to happen?
I don't know. Let's see. I don't know.
I'm 50/50 on that.
>> Hm.
Globalization is so beautiful because
I'm just sorry. I'm reading about the
Rex Tillerson more. So, first of all,
it's the first conventional-size LNG
carrier or the first sort of modern that
the country had. The naming ceremony
though was held at the Hudong Zhonghua
Shipyard in China, which of course is
where it was built. It's just so
beautiful. They
I look
>> Was Rex Tillerson there?
>> I don't know. I hope I hope he got to
like smash the glass or he's going to
smash the champagne glass.
>> Is that still an active tanker or or
>> Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, it is cuz I'm
looking at marinetraffic.com.
It's in the kind of near the Gulf of
Mexico right now, looks like. I don't
know what it's doing there, but yeah,
maybe it's leaving the Port of Houston
or something like that.
>> Better than being stuck in the Gulf. Uh
maybe we should thank the Thomas.
>> It's not uh stuck. Actually, that was
one of the interesting things that uh we
talked about
in our episode with Bob Brackett, which
is that actually a lot of the Qatar's
LNG revenue right now is from exports
from the Port of Houston because it's
involved in the investment there, etc.
So, let's talk about So, we mentioned
one of the topics that we've discussed
is just like the phenomenon the global
phenomenon known as Dubai. Right.
>> Oh, I'm so sorry. I'm I'm Googling the
Rex Tillerson.
>> Go on. We can keep going.
>> I just learned I just learned that Rex
Tillerson is not the only American
official to have an energy carrier named
after them. Guess what the other one is.
>> Go on.
>> Okay, Chevron once named an oil tanker
the Condoleezza Rice.
>> That's great. I love that.
But uh let's talk about the phenomenon
known as Dubai and all around the world
if you're an influencer and you're
good-looking and you like to post
selfies or you made a bunch of money in
crypto and you don't really have
anything to do. It's like okay, like
I know there's more to the Dubai economy
than that. I'm being a little bit
facetious, etc. But does this change the
trajectory at all or from your view
given, you know,
the relative
I don't know that basically the trends
of people who are looking for a very
stable place with low taxes and
wonderful weather, etc. Will they will
that trend continue in the same way that
it had been?
>> So, let me just tell you something about
the Dubai attractiveness. Yeah. Every
time I came to London
and obviously our Bloomberg office is in
the city and I saw old friends.
Seriously, every time people ask me how
can we move to the Middle East and how
can we move to Dubai? And these are
people who have no links to the Middle
East.
>> It's incredible.
>> I think it's an And let me just give you
another example, actually. In late 2024,
I took a sabbatical from Bloomberg and I
was I was teaching at Harvard. And 20%
of my office hour
was people asking me how to get jobs in
the Middle East.
>> It's incredible. Wait, were these
Americans asking you?
>> A mixed, yeah. But so it's not just
influencers and pretty people. It's like
a lot of brainy people also wanted to
move there.
>> I feel like for as much as we know about
all everyone who has moved to Dubai, the
big like it actually remains perhaps an
even underreported story of the sort of
like exit loyalty and voice. The exit
part, people wanting to get out of what
they see as crumbling, high-tax, unsafe
Western world where democracy and
>> Yeah, I I think what it offers you and
this is what So So I think there's two
sides to this. I think there are people
who live there.
I haven't heard a single person saying I
want to move out of Dubai permanently as
a result of this war.
>> Okay.
>> Some people have relocated temporarily.
I think some people on the margin might
decide to leave, but I haven't heard
that yet.
And I think what it offers you is
obviously like incredible safety.
It's well connected.
The weather is good 6 months of the
year.
And obviously for a lot of people taxes
is is just like zero taxes is is
appealing.
And if you're on the right
I wouldn't say right extreme of the
income distribution, but if you're on
the right right half of the income
distribution, it's actually a nice life.
So I think people who live there, I
think they're going to prove to be
stickier than we think. I think where
there will be probably challenge is that
the questions I've been getting about
can how you know how can I move to Dubai
and how can I get there?
They might become fewer as this war
develops and it depends on how long this
this war lasts. I I think there's
something else that happened in Dubai
where it's attractiveness increased
after the pandemic is that you have the
network effect. People have their
friends moved into Dubai.
>> Sure, yeah.
>> They thought, "Oh, you know what? The
weather is good, taxes are really,
really zero. And, you know, life is nice
and you get all the support that's on
the extra and it's things that
convenient. And then people had like,
you know, a network of friends that
already that already there and they're
willing to move there and and live
there.
So, I think that's that's the element of
it. I think yeah, so I think in terms of
the the long-term
aspect of it,
I think people who live there are
probably going to prove stickier than we
than we think. The attraction of new
people is probably going to ease on the
margin.
But again, there was a a whole long
queue of people who wanted to move there
and probably
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah, that might that might slow a bit,
but but probably not significant. I
think the other thing with Dubai is I
know this war is different because it's
hitting it directly.
But it did benefit from previous wars.
Money did tend to move to Dubai as a
result of conflicts, whether it's in the
Middle East or even in the case, for
example, of Russia-Ukraine, where we saw
a lot of money going into Dubai. We saw
the pandemic was beneficial to Dubai. A
lot of Brits moved to Dubai as a result
of that.
And, you know, that's one of the reasons
why the real estate market has taken off
since 2020.
>> Just one related question on this.
How can I move to Dubai?
>> Uh ask Tracy. She was there for a few
years.
>> but for real, what are the basics like?
>> First
of all, you'll still be paying taxes,
Joe, as an American citizen.
>> So, that's not
>> Forget about that.
Can we do like local economics in Dubai
for a second? Because if I go on some of
the message boards, and again, I think
like one important thing to recognize
here is that social media in the UAE it
can be fairly controlled. I see a lot of
posts right now about like I just lost
my job, I need to leave the country, I'm
taking out a new credit card in order to
buy my flight out of Dubai, which might
be a little bit extreme.
But just from an economic perspective,
like how many jobs do we expect to be
available locally in Dubai given some of
the pressures that we're seeing?
>> On your questions, Tracy, I think it
depends on the duration of war.
If the war ends tomorrow
or if even it continues at a lower
intensity where you have some, you know,
ships going through the Strait of Hormuz
where the attacks on Dubai
is a bit and the UAE in general and the
Gulf in general
that is very different world from if the
war war continues until, I don't know,
June or July or August for 6 months. So,
I think the economic impact depends on
the duration of war and that is a big
uncertain
aspect. On your question, Joe, who's
moving to Dubai?
A lot of hedge funds and asset managers
are actually moving to the UAE, a lot.
So, you know, the people that move are
are there. And then you have the sort of
the supporting environment that supports
these these companies.
>> Yeah.
>> Every every company that where we are in
Dubai, for example, we're in Dubai
International Financial Centre
and that has grown significantly since
the pandemic. They're
doing a new expansion and offices are
full and we've even our Bloomberg office
we expanded into a new floor in Dubai.
>> Actually, um that reminds me since we're
talking about the DIFC, you know, I
mentioned in the intro there is this
huge capital component in the Gulf
region. There's a lot of money there and
it tends to flow outward into other
things. Talk to us about how you
anticipate changes to some of those
capital flows as perhaps some of the oil
money is reduced. Although I take your
point that Saudi Arabia might be making
more than ever. Would you still expect
that outward flow or would you maybe
expect some of the Gulf countries to
have to start directing it more inward
to maybe rebuild the infrastructure that
they've lost?
>> So, a few things. I think Saudi's not
making more money than ever. It's just
making more money than when oil was at
$65 per barrel.
>> Sure. Sure. Oh, yes. Of course. Yes.
>> Yeah.
In terms of the direction of capital,
and you're right. I think the way I
think about the Gulf is that the Gulf
gives the world supplies the world with
three inputs. It supplies it with
energy, it supplies it with capital, and
supplies it with trade routes, and all
three are being hit by the current war.
And it gets from the world three prices.
It gets the price of interest rates,
because they have pegs to the dollar. It
gets the price of the dollar exchange
rate, and it gets the price of oil. It
doesn't determine the price of oil. That
comes from the global economy.
In terms of direction of capital, I
think the answer for me is fairly clear.
The direction is going to go down.
And it's going to go down because you're
having the interruptions to oil exports,
because that source of capital is that
you export oil and gas. You get the
income, you spend some of it
domestically,
and then the surplus you invest abroad.
I think the second thing, that the
defense spending will go up.
One, because they need to replenish on
the defense systems that they've been
using over the past 6 weeks.
And second, because they're realizing
that the world is a far more dangerous
place than it was 6 weeks ago.
Iran is more dangerous.
Israel's more expansionist. And then you
have these, you know, non-state actors,
Iraqi militant groups, Houthis in Yemen.
I think this conflict would probably
create new groups that we haven't heard
about before, and they are a threat.
So, I think they'll be spending more on
defense.
And then if you spend more on defense,
and if your income is lower, that
necessarily means that what you sent to
the world in terms of capital exports
will come down. And that is important.
That is important not just for, you
know, English football clubs and and I
don't know, real estate in in London or
in Egypt or
Turkish bank deposits or tech companies.
You guys hosted my colleagues Tom Orlik
and Jamie Rush on the book that that
Bloomberg Economics wrote on the price
of money. We had a chapter on that on
petrodollars and how petrodollars
actually suppressed long-term interest
rates in the US. Okay, it's it was 25
basis points, but given the size of the
US economy and the size of its debt,
that's still tens of billions of dollars
every year. If there's less flow into
that, that that will affect not just
these smaller markets, but also the
deepest market in the world, which is
the would be, you know, the US
Treasuries.
>> So, you mentioned something there that I
thought was important, you know, okay,
one effect is going to be likely an
increase in military spending for
obvious reasons.
Setting aside the fact that we don't
know how or when this war is going to
end, and something we haven't really
talked about yet, but setting aside that
we don't know how this is going to end,
it may emerge, and it right now many
people would probably say this is likely
that at the end of this war
our estimation of Iran as a major power
will have increased. It may be a toll
collector for the Strait of Hormuz going
forward. It is established that the
government is actually quite strong.
Several months ago maybe people thought
it was teetering on the edge. It may
turn out that actually this strengthens
the IRGC and the stability of the
existing regime. It's a established that
it has a military that can to some
extent withstand the full might or at
least the partial might of the United
States. How does that change the region
that, okay, everyone's view of Iran as a
sovereign security state has to rise or
seems very likely to rise as a result of
this war?
>> I think there's a couple of things to
mention here. The first thing is, as far
as Iran is concerned, I I this last past
six weeks have have taught us
something. And I keep saying you know
things taught us something. But we keep
learning from that what was happening
now. And that's basically if you have
clear and achievable goals
you can punch above your weight.
Iran had just basically two simple goals
because they they were completely
cornered which is basically survival of
the system
and deterrence so that they don't get
attacked again in a few months.
And they thought they could achieve
this. So it's very very clear goals,
very existential. They felt they could
they could achieve this by imposing
costs on their neighbors by hitting the
Gulf, on the global economy by hitting
the Gulf and closing the Strait of
Hormuz and hitting energy facilities.
Israel had a clear goal but it probably
wasn't achievable which is regime change
in Iran.
And the US is just confusing what
they're doing in in in terms of this war
like there's no clear well articulated
goal for this current war. And I think
that's why Iran is punching above its
weight.
What does that mean? I don't know if
it's going to hit you know Iran is going
to emerge as a power
but given that you know that it's
punching above its weight, given that
it's controlling the Strait of Hormuz
given that it actually has discovered
that the way to pressure the US and
Israel is by imposing costs on the
global economy via attacking the Gulf
that's not a safe world that the Gulf
want to be in.
And I think for the Gulf they're
thinking now about you know
given that that cuz even if this current
system in Iran does not survive and we
have a new system
you know they've learned the same lesson
which is basically if you get attacked,
if you're cornered, this is how you get
out of it by closing the Strait of
Hormuz and by attacking the Gulf. For
the Gulf that's a challenge and that's a
challenge that they need to address and
think about because they haven't faced
that sort of threat before.
>> Can I ask one more question which is you
mentioned the expansion of the Dubai
Financial Center DIFC 2.0 and I'm
looking at some of the mock-ups for it.
It's supposed to be completed in 2040,
but all of the mock-ups very beautiful,
lots of shiny glass buildings. And when
I'm thinking about potential changes
from the Iran war, one very visible one
would be, well, maybe
maybe there aren't as many very tall
glass buildings in places like Dubai
that can end up getting damaged by
drones. Like, would you expect an actual
physical change to the city's
architecture as a result of this?
>> So, this is what I think also the war
would hit like unexpected corners
beyond, you know, defense and
relationship with the US and the Strait
of Hormuz.
It's also architecture, you know,
there's a lot of um building that's
taking place in all these cities in the
Gulf are are growing.
The problem is that when you were in
Dubai, you know, living on the 20th
floor and you get the alert saying uh
you know, it's under attack, stay away,
don't go out, and stay away from
windows,
you know, your your place is is is uh
floor-to-ceiling of windows.
>> Yeah, you have to go down into the car
park where there's no air conditioning.
>> Some people did. Some people did. And
it's also I don't know if it's safe to
be next to cars.
>> Oh, yeah. That's a good point.
>> So, they they might be rethinking about
this. They might be rethinking you know,
this is this is what wars do. They
change a lot of things and a lot
perspectives on things. And and that
goes into corners that we didn't think
about before and to including
architecture. I always think the example
of of Kuwait is a clear one. Kuwait in
1990 or before 1990,
relative to its neighbors, it was fairly
advanced, you know, it had culture, it
was an open society, it had a
participatory political system, at times
a parliament that was quite loud and
vocal.
Infrastructure was was modern. And all
of a sudden, Iraqi tanks roll in. There
was an Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in 1990
and things changed in Kuwait.
And the big thing that happened there is
that they started investing less at home
sending most of their wealth abroad.
And over decades, that means
deteriorated infrastructure. If you
think about Kuwait, there there's a
couple of news items recently that
Kuwait might have power cuts, which for
an oil powerhouse, one of the most
richest countries in the region, and one
of the hottest countries in the world,
to have power cuts is strange. But you
can trace what is happening there in
terms of the electricity shortages in
Kuwait in 2026 to an event that happened
in 1990.
>> Wow.
>> So, yeah, it it will Yeah, it it may not
be the same lesson everywhere else, but
I think the lessons will be deep and
broad, and they'll go to unexpected
corners, including architecture trace.
>> All right, Zeiad Daoud, thank you so
much for coming back on Odd Lots. Truly
the perfect guest to walk us through all
of this. Really appreciate it.
>> Thank you for having me.
>> Joe, that was a great conversation with
Zeiad. As always, truly the perfect
guest.
There's so many things that stuck out at
me, but I think his last comment about
how war, you know, kind of unfolds and
changes things in unexpected ways was
very interesting. And the Kuwait example
he cited was very compelling.
>> No, that's fascinating. I would have had
no idea, and I'm reading this right now.
Kuwait, here is this energy powerhouse,
and Kuwait schedules electricity cuts to
do maintenance, and that the lack of
maintenance that had happened due to
domestic infrastructure can be traced to
fiscal priorities in the wake of a war
that happened over 35 years ago. It's
really Wow. Yeah, I mean, like Yeah, I
wouldn't have thought about that, but
it's obvious. And so, this is going to
reshape the region, obviously, in ways
we can't anticipate. I thought it was
very ominous that when he was talking
about various non-state actors, he
mentioned including non-state actors
we've never heard of that will now get
stronger or that will emerge out of
this. So, again, even if you know, we
look at our screens and the market's
back and maybe hopefully you know, maybe
the ceasefire will hold longer or the it
will the ceasefire will turn into the
end of the war, etc. It seems obvious
there's going to be major ramifications.
>> Yeah, the other thing that stood out to
me was the short comment about
petrodollars, which is really what we
mean when we're talking about capital
emanating from the Gulf. And I think
like to some extent that hasn't really
been appreciated yet. If you think that
these Gulf economies are maybe going to
have to rebuild infrastructure that was
damaged. If you think they're going to
have to build new infrastructure as a
result of nervousness around what
happens with the Strait of Hormuz in the
future. If you think that maybe they
have to do stimulus for their local
economies because of job losses, it just
feels like there's going to be
potentially a lot less money circulating
in the global economy.
>> Yeah, and then another way to think
about it, too, is that we're already in
a period of resource constraints. And
so, just like the rebuilding of various
infrastructure. In fact, and I don't
know that you know, one of the
facilities that was hit, I think there
was a basic issue, which is that they
need natural gas turbines. And we know
that natural gas turbines are among the
scarcest thing in the world right now
due to the AI data center build-out. And
so, here you have even further strain
and demand being placed on the sort of
physical building blocks of the modern
world at a time when they're already
very tight.
>> Yeah, it feels very inflationary.
>> Yeah, yeah, exactly.
>> All right, shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Lots podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway. You can
follow me at Tracy Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at The Stalwart. Follow our guest
Ziad Daoud. He's at ZiadMDaoud.
Follow our producers Carmen Rodriguez
@carmenarmandash @dashbot and Kilbride
@kilbride. And for more Odd Lots
content, go to bloomberg.com/oddlots
for the daily newsletter and all of our
episodes. And you can chat about all of
these topics 24/7 in our discord
discord.gg/oddlots.
>> And if you enjoy Odd Lots, if you like
it when we talk about the Gulf region,
then please leave us a positive review
on your favorite podcast platform. And
remember, if you are a Bloomberg
subscriber, you can listen to all of our
episodes absolutely ad-free. All you
need to do is find the Bloomberg channel
on Apple Podcasts and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.